Discussion of the indexing rules (#577)
PTB-MR/mrpro: docs/source/indexing.rst

Indexing Rules
==============

Data objects can be indexed similarly to NumPy arrays or tensors.

1. **Indexing as tuples**

   - As in NumPy, an index is always a tuple of indices. If it is not, it is converted to a tuple. The elements of the tuple are matched to the dimensions of the data from left to right.

   - Example::

       data[0, 1] == data[(0, 1)]  # The index is converted to a tuple
       data[(0, 1), ] != data[(0, 1)] 
	   data[(0, 1), ] == data[((0, 1), )]

2. **Broadcasting**

   - Indexing operations are performed on the fields of a dataclass in the following sequence:

>      1. Broadcasting to the dataclass's shape.

Reviewer: Just to verify, this is broadcasting the shape of the parent dataclass to all children? i.e. if I index kdata along k0 then acqidx is broadcasted first to the shape of kdata and then indexed. But you could not index kdata.header.acq_info along k0 directly, could you?

Author: yes.

the shape goes only upwards.the shape of a dataclass is always larger than of its fields.
something to also describe somewhere.

so, an acqidx will have shape k0=1, acq_info will be shape k0=1
but kdata will be the broadcasted shape of all acqinfo, data, traj

I was considering allowing indexing into shape 1 dimensions, so you could index.
so you could index into n_other=1 with (0,1,2),... and you would get n_other=3, indexing with any slice or single integer will keep the shape as n_other=1.
so kdata[0]=kdata[12322] if n_other==1.
(this is how indexing  would be implemented anyways to keep broadcasted dimensions broadcasted, just that there is an explicit check to raise an error if indexed out of bounds.)

     2. Indexing.
     3. Replacing stride-0 dimensions with singletons wherever possible.

   - This means each data object can be indexed as if all fields had the shape returned by ``dataobject.shape``, even if the fields are only broadcastable to this shape.

   - Example: ``acqidx`` is singleton in ``k0``. But the parent kdata object can be indexed along k0.

3. **Consistency of shapes after indexing**

   - Two data objects with the same shape property, indexed by the same indexer, will result in the same shape property.
   - This does *not* mean that all fields of the data class have the same shape after indexing, but rather that the fields can be broadcasted to the common shape.

4. **Slice indexing**

   - Indexing with a slice object or colon syntax (e.g., ``0:3``) selects a slice of the data.
   - A view along the dimension is returned if the stride is positive.

   - Example::

       a[slice1, slice2] == a[slice1, :][:, slice2] == a[:, slice1][slice1, :]

>    - For negative strides, a copy is performed because the underlying ``torch.Tensor`` does not support negative strides. This differs from NumPy, which always returns a view, and PyTorch, which raises an error for negative strides.

Author: i was considering that, but would you expect an error or rely on the error?
this is strictly a superset of pytorch.

>    - For negative strides, a copy is performed because the underlying ``torch.Tensor`` does not support negative strides. This differs from NumPy, which always returns a view, and PyTorch, which raises an error for negative strides.

Reviewer: my only concern would be that people more used to numpy often use negative strides and would expect a view and it would not be obvious to them that we do a copy. If the user knew that a copy is made then they might use a different approach which does not require a copy. Maybe we could print a warning?

>    - For negative strides, a copy is performed because the underlying ``torch.Tensor`` does not support negative strides. This differs from NumPy, which always returns a view, and PyTorch, which raises an error for negative strides.

Author: Warning is a good idea!

>    - For negative strides, a copy is performed because the underlying ``torch.Tensor`` does not support negative strides. This differs from NumPy, which always returns a view, and PyTorch, which raises an error for negative strides.

Author: ..i will skip this for now and just raise an exception

5. **Integer indexing**

>    - Integer indexing is equivalent to slicing with ``index:index+1``, so it does not remove dimensions.

Author: yes.
(other k2 k1 k0) would not be an allowed shape anyways as we enforce  (*other coils k2 k1 k0)

>    - Integer indexing is equivalent to slicing with ``index:index+1``, so it does not remove dimensions.

Author: This also needs an example that
data.shape=(2,2) 
data[3].shape == (0,2)
(which is what would happen for slices in numpy)

   - This differs from NumPy and PyTorch. Use ``squeeze`` to remove remaining singleton dimensions if needed.
   - Integer indexing always results in a view.

6. **Advanced indexing with sequences of integers**

   - If a single indexer is a sequence of integers (e.g., ``data[:, (0, 5)]``), indexing is performed for each value in the sequence, and the results are concatenated along the indexing dimension.

   - Example::

       data[:, (0, 5)].shape[1] == 2

7. **Vectorized indexing**

   - Using more than one sequence of integers as indices results in vectorized indexing by looping over the values in the sequences, performing indexing, and stacking along a new dimension at position 0.

   - Example::

>        data[(0, 5), :, (2, 3)] == stack([data[0, :, 2], data[5, :, 3]], dim=0)

Author: yes

>        data[(0, 5), :, (2, 3)] == stack([data[0, :, 2], data[5, :, 3]], dim=0)

Author: numpy would instead do (2,y)

>        data[(0, 5), :, (2, 3)] == stack([data[0, :, 2], data[5, :, 3]], dim=0)

Author: this could only be interpretet as outer indexing, not vectorized indexing, right? 
different sequence lengths (are integer array shapes) are incompatible with vectorized indexing. or which elements should be indexed by this?

numpy would make  you do data[(0, 4, 5), :, :][:, :, (2, 3)] for outer indexing, or use np.ix_.
(this is also true for two sequences of  the same length,  ` data[(0, 4), :, :][:, :, (2, 3)] != data[(0, 4), :, (2, 3)]
`
I should explicitly mention it and add this as an example, as this is also a common misconception with numpy indexing in  my non-represenative survey of 8.1 PhD students :D

   - At the position of the indexed dimensions, a singleton dimension will remain (unlike NumPy).
   - This rule applies regardless of whether the indexed dimensions are adjacent (unlike NumPy).

8. **Indexing with a boolean mask**

   - The boolean mask is first broadcasted to the shape of the indexed object.

   - Example::

       kdata.header.acqinfo.idx.slice == 1  # Can be used to index `kdata`

   - The result is the same as::

       [mask.nonzero(as_tuple=True)[k] if mask.shape[k] != 1 else slice(None) for k in range(mask.ndim)]

>    - Indexing with a single non-singleton dimension will not introduce new axes or change the shape of the singleton dimensions.

Author: indexing data with shape (5,4,3) with mask shape (1,4,1) will result in 5,N,3. where N is determined by the mask.
the 5 and 3 shape of data are not changed.

>    - Indexing with a single non-singleton dimension will not introduce new axes or change the shape of the singleton dimensions.

Author: I.e. the number of dimensions stays again the same.

>    - Indexing with more than one non-singleton dimension introduces a new zeroth dimension and results in two singleton dimensions in the data.

Author: ```suggestion
   - Indexing with a mask with more than one non-singleton dimension introduces a new zeroth dimension and results in singleton dimensions in the data.
  Example: 
        data.shape=(5,4,3) 
        mask.shape=(5,1,3)
        data[mask].shape==N,1,4,1 
        with N determined by the number of True values o the mask.

```

Author: ...None is forbidden as [...,None] would cause issues with the rule that acqidx are singleton in coils.
after the rearange pattern, these rules will be checked anyways. 
I am considering an `unsqueeze()` that can only unsqueeze in "other" dimensions as a simpler way than` kdata.rearrange('...-> 1 ...')` ...

Author: I am now considering allowing None at position 0.
Then the rule is: indexing will never remove axes. indexing can introduce new axes in front of the array.
this happens if using None, vectorized indexing, or boolean indexing along more than 1 dimension
